docs/umbrella.md, before:

<script
  src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML"
  type="text/javascript">
</script>

## Umbrella sampling with PLUMED

### Alanine dipeptide in vacuum
First of all, we will download the data required to run the calculations, which should be in the `data/umbrella` folder of this repository.
It should contain the following files

    $ ls data/umbrella/
        reference.pdb topolA.tpr    topolB.tpr

Using the typical Gromacs syntax, you could use these `tpr` files 
to run MD simulations using 

    $ gmx mdrun -plumed plumed.dat -s topolA.tpr -nsteps 200000 -x traj_unbiased.xtc

This will result in an unbiased simulation trajectory of the 
alanine dipeptide. 

When we run simulations with the PLUMED we will use an additional
flag `-plumed` that points to the unique input required to bias the 
simulations. Below, you can find an example input file to
estimate the values of the \\( \phi \\) and \\( \psi \\) dihedrals 
and histogram their values.

    MOLINFO STRUCTURE=reference.pdb
    phi: TORSION ATOMS=@phi-2
    psi: TORSION ATOMS=@psi-2

    # make histograms
    hhphi: HISTOGRAM ARG=phi STRIDE=100 GRID_MIN=-pi GRID_MAX=pi GRID_BIN=600 BANDWIDTH=0.05
    ffphi: CONVERT_TO_FES GRID=hhphi
    DUMPGRID GRID=ffphi FILE=fes_phi.dat STRIDE=200000

    hhpsi: HISTOGRAM ARG=psi STRIDE=100 GRID_MIN=-pi GRID_MAX=pi GRID_BIN=600 BANDWIDTH=0.05
    ffpsi: CONVERT_TO_FES GRID=hhpsi
    DUMPGRID GRID=ffpsi FILE=fes_psi.dat STRIDE=200000

    PRINT ARG=phi,psi FILE=colvar.dat STRIDE=100

Note that we are using a number of actions (`TORSION`, 
`HISTOGRAM` and `DUMPGRID`, to name a few). You should 
familiarize yourself with their 
[syntax](https://www.plumed.org/doc-v2.7/user-doc/html/glossary.html).

Introducing an umbrella bias in this script is exceedingly 
easy. It just requires adding an extra line to the script.
For example, to restrain the simulation with a harmonic
potential at 0 radians with a spring constant of 200,
we would write 

    # add restraining potential
    bb: RESTRAINT ARG=phi KAPPA=200.0 AT=0

Of course, we will be interested in running multiple 
window umbrella sampling, and hence the structure of
our directory should change with as many plumed files
as umbrellas windows. To generate 32 PLUMED input files, 
we can use the following Python script:

    at=np.linspace(-np.pi,np.pi,33)[:-1]
    print(at)
    for i in range(32):
        with open("plumed_" + str(i) + ".dat","w") as f:
            print("""
    # vim:ft=plumed
    MOLINFO STRUCTURE=reference.pdb
    phi: TORSION ATOMS=@phi-2 
    psi: TORSION ATOMS=@psi-2
    bb: RESTRAINT ARG=phi KAPPA=200.0 AT={}
    PRINT ARG=phi,psi,bb.bias FILE=colvar_multi_{}.dat STRIDE=100
    """.format(at[i],i),file=f)

And then we will run the 32 simulations

    $> for i in $(seq 0 1 31);
    do 
    gmx mdrun -plumed plumed_${i}.dat -s topolA.tpr -nsteps 200000 -x traj_comp_${i}.xtc
    done

The result from this will be a dataset of 32 simulations, all
initialized at the same conformation, but with umbrella potentials
that will bias the sampling to different regions of conformational
space.
 
After completion of the runs, we must analyze the resulting 
trajectories. In order to do that we concatenate the trajectories

    $ gmx trjcat -cat -f `for i in $(seq 0 1 31); do echo "traj_comp_${i}.xtc"; done` -o traj_multi_cat.xtc

Then, we analyze them using plumed driver:

    $ for i in $(seq 0 1 31)
    do 
    plumed driver --plumed plumed_${i}.dat --ixtc traj_multi_cat.xtc --trajectory-stride 100
    done

To visualize the output of the simulations, we can read the 
`colvar_multi_\*.dat` files and see what region of the 
Ramachandran map has been sampled by each of the runs. Using
a Jupyter-notebook we can run the following 


    import plumed
    import wham

    col=[]
    for i in range(32):
        col.append(plumed.read_as_pandas("colvar_multi_" + str(i)+".dat"))
     
    bias = np.zeros((len(col[0]["bb.bias"]),32))
    for i in range(32):
        bias[:,i] = col[i]["bb.bias"][-len(bias):]
    w = wham.wham(bias,T=kBT)
    colvar = col[0]
    colvar["logweights"] = w["logW"]
    plumed.write_pandas(colvar,"bias_multi.dat")

We then write a file called `plumed_multi.dat` to obtain 
reweighted free energy surfaces. The file should look as
follows:

    # vim:ft=plumed
    phi: READ FILE=bias_multi.dat VALUES=phi IGNORE_TIME
    psi: READ FILE=bias_multi.dat VALUES=psi IGNORE_TIME
    lw: READ FILE=bias_multi.dat VALUES=logweights IGNORE_TIME
    
    hhphi: HISTOGRAM ARG=phi GRID_MIN=-pi GRID_MAX=pi GRID_BIN=600 BANDWIDTH=0.05
    ffphi: CONVERT_TO_FES GRID=hhphi
    DUMPGRID GRID=ffphi FILE=fes_phi_cat.dat
    
    hhpsi: HISTOGRAM ARG=psi GRID_MIN=-pi GRID_MAX=pi GRID_BIN=600 BANDWIDTH=0.05
    ffpsi: CONVERT_TO_FES GRID=hhpsi
    DUMPGRID GRID=ffpsi FILE=fes_psi_cat.dat
    
    hhphir: HISTOGRAM ARG=phi GRID_MIN=-pi GRID_MAX=pi GRID_BIN=600 BANDWIDTH=0.05 LOGWEIGHTS=lw
    ffphir: CONVERT_TO_FES GRID=hhphir
    DUMPGRID GRID=ffphir FILE=fes_phi_catr.dat
    
    hhpsir: HISTOGRAM ARG=psi GRID_MIN=-pi GRID_MAX=pi GRID_BIN=600 BANDWIDTH=0.05 LOGWEIGHTS=lw
    ffpsir: CONVERT_TO_FES GRID=hhpsir
    DUMPGRID GRID=ffpsir FILE=fes_psi_catr.dat

This script is again read by plumed driver, and from this program we get our outputs.


Clearly, using umbrella sampling we have been able to cover much more ground for our reaction coordinates, while obtaining a very consistent PMF in the regions that actually matter.
One of the assignments in the masterclass is to run from a different initial state, that corresponding to the `topolB.tpr` Gromacs input file.

Commit message:

adds what was missing from the umbrella example

docs/umbrella.md, after:

<script
  src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML"
  type="text/javascript">
</script>

## Umbrella sampling with PLUMED

### Alanine dipeptide in vacuum
First of all, we will download the data required to run the calculations, which should be in the `data/umbrella` folder of this repository.
It should contain the following files

    $ ls data/umbrella/
        ala_dipeptide_analysis.ipynb topolA.tpr                   wham.py
        reference.pdb                topolB.tpr

Using the typical Gromacs syntax, you could use these `tpr` files 
to run MD simulations using 

    $ gmx mdrun -s topolA.tpr -nsteps 200000 -x traj_unbiased.xtc

This will result in an unbiased simulation trajectory of the 
alanine dipeptide. 

When we run simulations with the PLUMED we will use an additional
flag `-plumed` that points to the unique input required to bias the 
simulations. Below, you can find an example input file to
estimate the values of the \\( \phi \\) and \\( \psi \\) dihedrals 
and histogram their values.

    MOLINFO STRUCTURE=reference.pdb
    phi: TORSION ATOMS=@phi-2
    psi: TORSION ATOMS=@psi-2

    # make histograms
    hhphi: HISTOGRAM ARG=phi STRIDE=100 GRID_MIN=-pi GRID_MAX=pi GRID_BIN=600 BANDWIDTH=0.05
    ffphi: CONVERT_TO_FES GRID=hhphi
    DUMPGRID GRID=ffphi FILE=fes_phi.dat STRIDE=200000

    hhpsi: HISTOGRAM ARG=psi STRIDE=100 GRID_MIN=-pi GRID_MAX=pi GRID_BIN=600 BANDWIDTH=0.05
    ffpsi: CONVERT_TO_FES GRID=hhpsi
    DUMPGRID GRID=ffpsi FILE=fes_psi.dat STRIDE=200000

    PRINT ARG=phi,psi FILE=colvar.dat STRIDE=100

Note that we are using a number of actions (`TORSION`, 
`HISTOGRAM` and `DUMPGRID`, to name a few). You should 
familiarize yourself with their 
[syntax](https://www.plumed.org/doc-v2.7/user-doc/html/glossary.html).

Introducing an umbrella bias in this script is exceedingly 
easy. It just requires adding an extra line to the script.
For example, to restrain the simulation with a harmonic
potential at 0 radians with a spring constant of 200,
we would write 

    # add restraining potential
    bb: RESTRAINT ARG=phi KAPPA=200.0 AT=0

Of course, we will be interested in running multiple 
window umbrella sampling, and hence the structure of
our directory should change with as many plumed files
as umbrellas windows. To generate 32 PLUMED input files, 
we can use the following Python script:

    at=np.linspace(-np.pi,np.pi,33)[:-1]
    print(at)
    for i in range(32):
        with open("plumed_" + str(i) + ".dat","w") as f:
            print("""
    # vim:ft=plumed
    MOLINFO STRUCTURE=reference.pdb
    phi: TORSION ATOMS=@phi-2 
    psi: TORSION ATOMS=@psi-2
    bb: RESTRAINT ARG=phi KAPPA=200.0 AT={}
    PRINT ARG=phi,psi,bb.bias FILE=colvar_multi_{}.dat STRIDE=100
    """.format(at[i],i),file=f)

And then we will run the 32 simulations

    $> for i in $(seq 0 1 31);
    do 
    gmx mdrun -plumed plumed_${i}.dat -s topolA.tpr -nsteps 200000 -x traj_comp_${i}.xtc
    done

The result from this will be a dataset of 32 simulations, all
initialized at the same conformation, but with umbrella potentials
that will bias the sampling to different regions of conformational
space.
 
After completion of the runs, we must analyze the resulting 
trajectories. In order to do that we concatenate the trajectories

    $ gmx trjcat -cat -f `for i in $(seq 0 1 31); do echo "traj_comp_${i}.xtc"; done` -o traj_multi_cat.xtc

Then, we analyze them using plumed driver:

    $ for i in $(seq 0 1 31)
    do 
    plumed driver --plumed plumed_${i}.dat --ixtc traj_multi_cat.xtc --trajectory-stride 100
    done

To visualize the output of the simulations, we can read the 
`colvar_multi_\*.dat` files and see what region of the 
Ramachandran map has been sampled by each of the runs. Using
a Jupyter-notebook we can run the following 


    import plumed
    import wham

    col=[]
    for i in range(32):
        col.append(plumed.read_as_pandas("colvar_multi_" + str(i)+".dat"))
     
    bias = np.zeros((len(col[0]["bb.bias"]),32))
    for i in range(32):
        bias[:,i] = col[i]["bb.bias"][-len(bias):]
    w = wham.wham(bias,T=kBT)
    colvar = col[0]
    colvar["logweights"] = w["logW"]
    plumed.write_pandas(colvar,"bias_multi.dat")

We then write a file called `plumed_multi.dat` to obtain 
reweighted free energy surfaces. The file should look as
follows:

    # vim:ft=plumed
    phi: READ FILE=bias_multi.dat VALUES=phi IGNORE_TIME
    psi: READ FILE=bias_multi.dat VALUES=psi IGNORE_TIME
    lw: READ FILE=bias_multi.dat VALUES=logweights IGNORE_TIME
    
    hhphi: HISTOGRAM ARG=phi GRID_MIN=-pi GRID_MAX=pi GRID_BIN=600 BANDWIDTH=0.05
    ffphi: CONVERT_TO_FES GRID=hhphi
    DUMPGRID GRID=ffphi FILE=fes_phi_cat.dat
    
    hhpsi: HISTOGRAM ARG=psi GRID_MIN=-pi GRID_MAX=pi GRID_BIN=600 BANDWIDTH=0.05
    ffpsi: CONVERT_TO_FES GRID=hhpsi
    DUMPGRID GRID=ffpsi FILE=fes_psi_cat.dat
    
    hhphir: HISTOGRAM ARG=phi GRID_MIN=-pi GRID_MAX=pi GRID_BIN=600 BANDWIDTH=0.05 LOGWEIGHTS=lw
    ffphir: CONVERT_TO_FES GRID=hhphir
    DUMPGRID GRID=ffphir FILE=fes_phi_catr.dat
    
    hhpsir: HISTOGRAM ARG=psi GRID_MIN=-pi GRID_MAX=pi GRID_BIN=600 BANDWIDTH=0.05 LOGWEIGHTS=lw
    ffpsir: CONVERT_TO_FES GRID=hhpsir
    DUMPGRID GRID=ffpsir FILE=fes_psi_catr.dat

This script is again read by plumed driver, and from this program we get our outputs.

	plumed driver --plumed plumed_multi.dat --ixtc traj_multi_cat.xtc --trajectory-stride 100 --kt 2.4943387854

In the folder where you have found the data to run these tests you can find a script that will let you plot the free energy landscapes as estimated from umbrella sampling and compare them with those from the equilibrium MD trajectory.
Clearly, using umbrella sampling we have been able to cover much more ground for our reaction coordinates, while obtaining a very consistent PMF in the regions that actually matter.
One of the assignments in the masterclass is to run from a different initial state, that corresponding to the `topolB.tpr` Gromacs input file.
